=============================================================================
                           Zeta Library Reference
=============================================================================

:Author: Roman Neuhauser
:Contact: neuhauser@sigpipe.cz
:Copyright: This document is in the public domain.
:HeadURL: $HeadURL$
:Id: $Id$

.. contents::

Concepts
========

_`Array callback` is a function which takes up to three arguments: ::

  function (val, ind, arr)

These functions are used by many array algorithms.

* *val* is the value of the current array element
* *ind* is the index of the current array element
* *arr* is the array

_`Comparison function` is a binary function which returns an integer
greater than, equal to, or less than 0, according as *lhs* is greater
than, equal to, or less than *rhs*.

_`Shallow copy` *c* of an array *a* is an array such that
*c[N]* == *a[Nth set element]*.  That is, *c* is always consecutive, even if
*a* contains "holes".  *c.length* == *a.length* is true only if *a* is
consecutive, and *c* == *a* is never true.

_`Predicate` is a function which returns values convertible to bool.

Conventions
===========

The Equivalency sections, where present, follow a certain set of rules, most
of which should be obvious.  These things are worth stressing:

* the ``==`` operators should be interpreted as "is the same as" or "has the
  same effects" rather than just "returns the same value"; the latter is
  implied, but merely a subset of the intended meaning
* argument names *f*, *g*, *h* suggest these arguments are functions, while
  *a*, *b*, *c*, and *x*, *y* and *z* imply no such constraint
* function calls with no arguments usually imply nullary functions
* function calls with one argument usually imply unary functions
* function calls with two arguments usually imply binary functions
* function calls with three arguments usually imply variadic functions

The Possible Implementation sections, where included, display a possible
(usually actual) implementation(s) of the function using other Zeta
functions.

Functions
=========

Function Adapters
+++++++++++++++++

bind(fun, binders)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*fun* is a function.  *binders* is an array of functions.
*bind* returns a variadic function such that calling it with arguments
*a1, a2, ..., aN* (*args* for brevity) is the same as calling
*fun(binders[0](args), binders[1](args) ... binders[binders.length - 1](args))*.

In other words, *bind* returns a function which wraps *fun*, *bind*'s
first argument.  When called, the wrapper returned from *bind* doesn't
just pass its arguments to *fun*, it uses *binders* to generate *fun*'s
arguments: *binders[0]* supplies the first argument, *binders[1]* second
one, and so on.  Each binder is called with the arguments the wrapper is
being called with.  *fun* is then called with as many positional arguments
as there are *binders*.

Equivalency: ::

    bind(fun, [f, g, h])(x, y, z) == fun(f(x, y, z), g(x, y, z), h(x, y, z))

See Also: `$1`_, `$2`_, `$3`_, `argv`_, `bind1st`_, `bind2nd`_, `binder`_,
`value`_.

bind1st(fun, lhs)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*fun* is a binary function.  *lhs* is any value.  *bind1st* returns
a unary function which calls *fun* with *lhs* as the first argument.
Returns *fun*'s return value.

Equivalency: ::

    bind1st(fun, lhs)(rhs) == fun(lhs, rhs)

See Also: `bind`_, `bind2nd`_, `binder`_.

Example:

Print powers of 2: ::

    for_(
        map(bind1st(pow, 2), range(1, 16))
      , use1st(print)
    );

bind2nd(fun, rhs)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*fun* is a binary function.  *rhs* is any value.  *bind2nd* returns
a unary function which calls *fun* with *rhs* as the second argument.
Returns *fun*'s return value.

Equivalency: ::

    bind2nd(fun, rhs)(lhs) == fun(lhs, rhs)

See Also: `bind`_, `bind1st`_, `binder`_.

Example:

Print numbers raised to the second power: ::

    for_(
        map(bind2nd(pow, 2), range(1, 16))
      , use1st(print)
    );


binder(fun)
~~~~~~~~~~~

*fun* is a function.  *binder* returns a variadic function which returns
*fun* with all arguments bound from its argument list.  Returns *fun*'s
return value.

Equivalency: ::

    binder(fun)(x, y, z)(a, b, c) == bind(fun, map(value, [z, y, x]))(a, b, c)

See Also: `$1`_, `$2`_, `$3`_, `argv`_, `bind`_, `bind1st`_, `bind2nd`_.

collect(fun)
~~~~~~~~~~~~

*fun* is a unary function.  *collect* returns a variadic function such
that calling it with arguments *a1, a2, ..., aN* is the same as calling
*fun([a1, a2, ..., aN])*.  Returns *fun*'s return value.

Equivalency: ::

    collect(fun)(x, y, z) == fun([x, y, z])

See Also: `apply`_, `spread`_.

Possible implementation: ::

    var collect = bind2nd(compose, argv);

compose(f, g)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*f* and *g* are functions.  *compose* returns a variadic function such
that calling it with arguments *a1, a2, ..., aN* is the same as calling
*f(g(a1, a2, ..., aN))*.

Equivalency: ::

    compose(f, g)(x, y, z) == f(g(x, y, z))

See Also: `$1`_, `$2`_, `$3`_, `argv`_, `bind`_, `bind1st`_, `bind2nd`_,
`binder`_, `composex`_.

Possible implementation: ::

    var compose = function(f, g)
    {
        return bind(f, [g]);
    }

Example:

Find the index of the first element with ``false`` truth value: ::

    var arr = [2, 'f', 0, 1, -3];
    assertEquals(2, find_if(not, arr));

composex(fs)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*fs* is an array of functions.  *composex* returns a variadic function such
that calling it with arguments *a1, a2, ..., aN* is the same as calling
*fs[0](fs[1](...fs[fs.length - 1](a1, a2, ... aN)))*.

*composex* is a generalization of the *compose* function adapter.

Equivalency: ::

    composex([f, g, h])(x, y, z) == f(g(h(x, y, z)))

See Also: `$1`_, `$2`_, `$3`_, `bind`_, `bind1st`_, `bind2nd`_, `binder`_,
`compose`_.

Possible implementation: ::

    var composex = bind(reduce, [value(compose), $1, value(itself)]);

curry(f, v)
~~~~~~~~~~~

*f* is a function, *v* is a value.  *curry* returns a variadic function
such that calling it with arguments *a1, a2, ... aN* is the same as calling
*f(v, a1, a2, ... aN)*. 

join(arr[, sep])
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*arr* is an array.  *sep* is any value, defaults to a comma.  *join*
returns a string of all *arr* elements with *sep* between every two
elements.  *join* relies on *arr.join*, including its behavior when *sep*
is omitted.

Equivalency: ::

    join(arr, sep) == arr.join(sep)
    join(arr) == arr.join()

See Also: `joiner`_, `split`_.

Example: ::

    assertEquals('a-b-c', join(['a', 'b', 'c'], '-'));

method(that, fun)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*that* is an object.  *fun* is a function.  *method* returns a variadic
function such that calling it with arguments *a1, a2, ..., aN* is the same
as calling *fun(a1, a2, ..., aN)* with *this* set to *that*.  Returns *fun*'s
return value.

Equivalency: ::

    method(that, fun)(x, y, z) == fun.call(that, x, y, z)

negate(fun)
~~~~~~~~~~~

*fun* is a function.  *negate* returns a variadic function such that
calling it with arguments *a1, a2, ... aN* is the same as calling
*!fun(a1, a2, ... aN)*.

Equivalency: ::

    negate(f)(x, y, z) == !f(x, y, z)

See Also: `not`_.

Possible implementation: ::

    var negate = bind1st(compose, not);

split(str[, sep])
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*str* is an array.  *sep* is any value.  *split* returns an array of all
maximal nonoverlapping *str* substrings separated with *sep*.  *split*
relies on *str.split*, including its behavior when *sep* is omitted.

Equivalency: ::

    split(str, sep) == str.split(sep)
    split(str) == str.split()

See Also: `join`_, `joiner`_, `splitter`_.

Example: ::

    var rv = split('a-b-c', '-');
    assertEquals(3, rv.length);
    assertEquals('a', rv[0]);
    assertEquals('b', rv[1]);
    assertEquals('c', rv[2]);

spread(fun)
~~~~~~~~~~~

*fun* is a function.  *spread* returns a unary function which takes
an array, and calls *fun* with positional arguments supplied from that
array.  Returns *fun*'s return value.

Equivalency: ::

    spread(fun)([x, y, z]) == fun(x, y, z)

See Also: `apply`_, `collect`_.

Possible implementation: ::

    var spread = bind1st(bind1st, apply);

Example: ::

    var emps = [
        [1, "John"],
        [2, "Mary"],
        [3, "Eric"],
    ];
    var display = function (id, name)
    {
        print("Employee no. " + id + " is " + name);
    }
    for_(emps, spread(display));

to_bool(fun)
~~~~~~~~~~~~

*fun* is a function.  *to_bool* returns a variadic function such that
calling it with arguments *a1, a2, ... aN* is the same as calling
*Boolean(fun(a1, a2, ...  aN))*.

Equivalency: ::

    to_bool(f)(x, y, z) == Boolean(f(x, y, z))

See Also: `compose`_.

Possible implementation: ::

    var to_bool = bind1st(compose, Boolean);

to_num(fun)
~~~~~~~~~~~

*fun* is a function.  *to_num* returns a variadic function such that
calling it with arguments *a1, a2, ... aN* is the same as calling
*Number(fun(a1, a2, ...  aN))*.

Equivalency: ::

    to_num(f)(x, y, z) == Number(f(x, y, z))

See Also: `compose`_.

Possible implementation: ::

    var to_num = bind1st(compose, Number);

use1st(fun)
~~~~~~~~~~~

*fun* is a unary function.  *use1st* returns a variadic function such that
calling it with arguments *a1, a2, ... aN* is the same as calling *fun(a1)*.

Equivalency: ::

    use1st(f)(x, y, z) == compose(f, $1)(x, y, z) == f(x)

Possible implementation: ::

    var use1st = bind2nd(compose, $1);

See Also: `$1`_, `$2`_, `$3`_, `argv`_, `compose`_, `use2nd`_.

use2nd(fun)
~~~~~~~~~~~

*fun* is a unary function.  *use1st* returns a variadic function such that
calling it with arguments *a1, a2, ... aN* is the same as calling *fun(a2)*.

Equivalency: ::

    use2nd(f)(x, y, z) == compose(f, $2)(x, y, z) == f(y)

See Also: `$1`_, `$2`_, `$3`_, `argv`_, `compose`_, `use1st`_.

Possible implementation: ::

    var use2nd = bind2nd(compose, $2);

Function Generators
+++++++++++++++++++

conjoin(fs)
~~~~~~~~~~~

*fs* is an array of functions.  *conjoin* returns a variadic predicate_
which calls each function in *fs* in turn relaying arguments until one
returns false or until *fs* is exhausted.  Returns false if one of the
functions returned false, otherwise returns the return value of the last
*fs* element.  Returns ``true`` if *fs* is empty.

This is a functional generalization of the *&&* operator.

Equivalency: ::

    conjoin([f, g, h])(x, y, z) == true && (f(x, y, z) && g(x, y, z) && h(x, y, z))

See Also: `disjoin`_.

disjoin(fs)
~~~~~~~~~~~

*fs* is an array of functions.  *disjoin* returns a variadic predicate_
which calls each function in *fs* in turn relaying arguments until one
returns true or until *fs* is exhausted.  Returns true if one of the
functions returned true, otherwise returns the return value of the
successful *fs* element.  Returns ``false`` if *fs* is empty.

This is a functional generalization of the *||* operator.

Equivalency: ::

    disjoin([f, g, h])(x, y, z) == false || (f(x, y, z) || g(x, y, z) || h(x, y, z))

See Also: `conjoin`_.

ifte(p, t, f)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*p* is a `predicate`_.  *t* is a function.  *f* is a function.
*ifte* returns a variadic function such that calling it with arguments
*a1, a2, ... aN* is the same as calling *t(a1, a2, ... aN)* or
*f(a1, a2, ... aN)*, depending on the value of *p(a1, a2, ... aN)*.

Equivalency: ::

    ifte(p, t, f) == function ()
    {
        if (apply(p, arguments)) {
            return apply(t, arguments);
        } else {
            return apply(f, arguments);
        }
    }

Possible implementation: ::

    var ifte = function (p, t, f)
    {
        return function ()
        {
            var c = bind2nd(apply, arguments);

            return c(c(p) ? t : f)
        }
    }

insert(arr)
~~~~~~~~~~~

*arr* is an array.  *insert* returns a *function (val, ind)* which
assigns *val* to *arr[ind]*.  Returns *val*.

Equivalency: ::

    insert(arr)(v, i) == (arr[i] = v)

See Also: `push`_.

joiner(sep)
~~~~~~~~~~~

*sep* is any value.  *joiner* returns a unary function such that calling
it with argument *arr* is the same as calling *join(arr, sep)*.

Equivalency: ::

    joiner(sep)(arr) == bind2nd(join, sep)(arr) == join(arr, sep)

See Also: `join`_, `split`_, `splitter`_.

Possible implementation: ::

    var joiner = bind1st(bind2nd, join);

nth(arr)
~~~~~~~~

*arr* is an array or object.  *nth* returns a *function (ind)* which
returns *arr[ind]*.

Equivalency: ::

    nth(arr)(i) == arr[i]

See Also: `member`_, `project`_, `select`_.

Possible implementation: ::

    var nth = bind1st(bind1st, member);

push(arr)
~~~~~~~~~

*arr* is an array.  *push* returns a variadic function which pushes its
arguments into *arr*.  Returns the new length of *arr*.

Equivalency: ::

    push(arr)(x, y, z) == arr.push(x, y, z)

Possible implementation: ::

    var push = bind(method, [$1, select('push')]);

See Also: `insert`_, `member`_.

splitter(sep)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*sep* is any value.  *splitter* returns a unary function such that calling
it with argument *arr* is the same as calling *split(arr, sep)*.

See Also: `join`_, `joiner`_, `split`_.

Equivalency: ::

    splitter(sep)(arr) == bind2nd(split, sep)(arr) == split(arr, sep)

Possible implementation: ::

    var splitter = bind1st(bind2nd, split);

value(val)
~~~~~~~~~~

*val* is any value.  *value* returns a function which returns *val*.
Reference types are not copied.

Equivalency: ::

    value(v)(x, y, z) == v

See Also: `false_`_, `itself`_, `true_`_.

Other
+++++

apply(fun, args)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*fun* is a function.  *args* is an array.  *fun* is called with positional
arguments supplied from *args*.  *apply* returns *fun*'s return value.

Equivalency: ::

    apply(fun, [x, y, z]) == fun(x, y, z)

See Also: `spread`_.

Example: ::

    var args = [
        [0, 5],
        [3, 3, 2],
        [3, 3, -3],
        [-3, 4]
    ];
    var ranges = map(spread(range), args);

argv(...)
~~~~~~~~~

*argv* is a variadic function which returns a `shallow copy`_ of its
*arguments* object as an array.

Equivalency: ::

    args(x, y, z) == [x, y, z]

See Also: `$1`_, `$2`_, `$3`_, `use1st`_, `use2nd`_.

Possible implementation: ::

    function argv()
    {
        return map(itself, arguments);
    }

Algorithms
==========

Primitives
++++++++++

for_(arr, op)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*arr* is an array.  *op* is an `array callback`_.  *op* is called
once for each element in *arr*.

The range of elements processed is set before the first invocation
of callback.  Elements which are appended to the array after the call
to *for_* begins will not be visited by *fun*.  If existing elements
of *arr* are changed or deleted, their value as passed to *fun* will
be the value at the time *for_* visits them; elements that are deleted
are not visited.

Example:

Print all elements of an array: ::

    for_(
        ['foo', 'bar', 'baz']
      , function (v)
        {
            print(v);
        }
    );

while_(cond, fun)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*cond* is a nullary predicate_.  *fun* is a nullary function.
*while_* trivially wraps a while statement, that is, it calls *fun* until
*cond* returns ``false``.

Array Transformations
+++++++++++++++++++++

chain(arrs)
~~~~~~~~~~~

*arrs* is an array of arrays.  *chain* returns a concatenation of *arrs*.

Equivalency: ::

    chain([[a, b, c], [d, e, f]]) == [a, b, c, d, e, f]

chunk(arr, sz)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*arr* is an array.  *sz* is an integer.  *chunk* returns *arr* split into
chunks of *sz* elements each.  The last chunk may contain fewer elements.

See Also: `group_by`_.

cons(v, a)
~~~~~~~~~~

*a* is an array.  *v* is a value.  *cons* returns a `shallow copy`_ of *a*
with *v* prepended.

copy(arr)
~~~~~~~~~

*arr* is an array.  *copy* returns a `shallow copy`_ of *arr*.

Equivalency: ::

    copy(arr) == arr.concat()

Possible implementation: ::

    var copy = bind1st(map, itself);
    var copy = bind2nd(method, select('concat'));

inner_product(lhs, rhs)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*lhs* is an array of numbers.  *rhs* is an array of numbers.  *inner_product*
returns the sum of multiplications of respective elements of *lhs* and *rhs*.

More precisely, *inner_product*  first initializes *result* with 0, and then,
for each pair *lhs[i], rhs[i]*, *rv* is updated with *rv + lhs[i] * rhs[i]*.

Example: ::

    assertEquals(35, inner_product([1, 3], [5, 10]));

filter(pred, arr)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*pred* is an `array callback`_ predicate_.  *arr* is an array.  *pred* is
called once with each element in *arr*.  *filter* returns an array of those
elements of *arr* for which *pred* returned a value convertible to ``true``.

See Also: `copy`_, `map`_, `unique`_.

group_by(fun, arr)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*fun* is an `array callback`_, expected to return values convertible to
integers.  *arr* is an array.  *group_by* calls *fun* once for each element
in *arr*.  *group_by* returns a (possibly sparse) array such that values
returned by *fun* are used for keys, and values are arrays of *arr* elements
which generated that particular key.

items(obj)
~~~~~~~~~~

*obj* is an object.  *items* returns an array of *obj*'s *[key, value]* pairs.

Equivalency: ::

    items({a: 10, b: 20, c: 30}) == [['a', 10], ['b', 20], ['c', 30]]

See Also: `properties`_.

keys(arr)
~~~~~~~~~

*arr* is an array.  *keys* returns an array of indexes in *arr* which have
values assigned to them.

Equivalency: ::

    keys(arr) == map($2, arr)

Possible implementation: ::

    var keys = bind1st(map, $2);

map(fun, arr)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*fun* is an `array callback`_.  *arr* is an array.  *fun* is called
once for each element in *arr*.  *map* returns an array of results.

See Also: `copy`_, `filter`_, `reduce`_.

Example:

Compute Fibonnaci numbers: ::

    var data = [0, 2, 4, 6, 8];
    var exp = [1, 2, 5, 13, 34];
    for_(
        map(fib, data)
      , function (v, i)
        {
            assertEquals(exp[i], v);
        }
    );

product(arr)
~~~~~~~~~~~~

*arr* is an array.  *product* returns the result of multiplication of all
*arr* elements.

Equivalency: ::

    product([x, y, z]) == reduce(mul, [x, y, z], 1) == x * y * z

See Also: `reduce`_, `sum`_.

properties(obj)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*obj* is an object.  *properties* returns an array of *obj*'s property names.

See Also: `items`_.

reduce(fun, arr, init)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*fun* is a binary function, *arr* is an array. *init* is any value.
*reduce* is a generalization of summation: it computes the sum (or some
other binary operation) of *init* and all elements of *arr*.

*fun* is not required to be either commutative or associative: the order of
all of *reduce*'s operations is specified. The result is first initialized
to *init*. Then, for each element in *arr*, in order from beginning to end,
it is updated by *result = fun(result, elem)*.

reverse(arr)
~~~~~~~~~~~~

*arr* is an array.  *reverse* returns a `shallow copy`_ of *arr* with
elements in reverse order.

slice(arr, start[, end])
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*arr* is an array, *start* is an integer, zero-based index into *arr*,
*end* is an integer, zero-based index into *arr*.  *slice* returns
a `shallow copy`_ of the range denoted by *start*, *end*.

*slice* relies on *arr.slice*, including its behavior when *end* is not
provided.

Equivalency: ::

    slice(arr, start, end) == arr.slice(start, end)

sorted(arr[, cmp])
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*arr* is an array, *cmp* is a `comparison function`_.  *sorted* returns
a `shallow copy`_ of *arr* sorted according to *cmp*.

*sorted* relies on Array.prototype.sort, including its behavior when
*cmp* is not provided.

sum(arr)
~~~~~~~~

*arr* is an array.  *sum* returns the result of addition of all
*arr* elements.

Equivalency: ::

    sum([x, y, z]) == reduce(plus, [x, y, z], 1) == x + y + z

See Also: `product`_, `reduce`_.

take_while(pred, arr)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*pred* is an unary predicate.  *arr* is an array.  *take_while* copies
elements of *arr* until *pred(elem)* returns false.

unique(eqfun, arr)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*eqfun* is a binary predicate_.  *arr* is an array.  *unique* returns a
`shallow copy`_ of *arr* such that every time a consecutive group of
identical elements appears in *arr*, *unique* copies only the first element.

zip(arrs)
~~~~~~~~~

*arrs* is an array of arrays.  *zip* returns an array of arrays such
that the *nth* element contains the *nth* element from each input array.
The returned array has as many elements as the shortest input array.

Example: ::

    var a1 = [100, 101, 102, 103, 200];
    var a2 = ['a', 'b', 'c', 'd'];

    var rv = zip([a1, a2]);
    assertEquals(min(a1.length, a2.length), rv.length);
    assertEquals(100, rv[0][0]);
    assertEquals('a', rv[0][1]);

Array Generators
++++++++++++++++

fill(cnt, val)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*cnt* is a natural number.  *val* is any value.  *fill* returns an array
of *cnt* elements with *val* for values.  Reference types are not copied.

See Also: `iota`_, `map`_.

Possible implementation: ::

    var fill = bind(map, [use2nd(value), iota]);

iota(cnt)
~~~~~~~~~

*cnt* is an integer.  *iota* returns an array of *cnt* integers such that
*rv[i] == i*. ::

    iota(5) == [0, 1, 2, 3, 4]

range(start, cnt[, step])
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*start* is an integer. *cnt* is an integer. *step* is an integer,
defaults to 1.  *range* returns an array of *cnt* integers such that
*rv[i] == start + (step * i)*. ::

    range(0, 5, 2) == [0, 2, 4, 6, 8]
    range(0, 5, 1) == [0, 1, 2, 3, 4]
    range(0, 5) == [0, 1, 2, 3, 4]

Other
+++++

every(pred, arr)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*arr* is an array, *pred* is an `array callback`_.  *pred* is called
with each element in *arr* as long as it returns ``true``, until *arr*
is exhausted or *pred* returns ``false``.  *every* returns ``true``
if *pred* returned ``true`` for all elements, ``false`` otherwise.
Returns ``true`` if *arr* is empty.

Example:

Test whether all numbers in an array are positive: ::

    var is_pos = bind1st(lt, 0);
    assertEquals(true, every(is_pos, [1, 2, 3]));
    assertEquals(false, every(is_pos, [1, -2, 3]));

some(pred, arr)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*arr* is an array, *pred* is an `array callback`_.  *pred* is called
with each element in *arr* as long as it returns ``false`` until *arr*
is exhausted or *pred* returns ``true``.  *some* returns ``false``
if *pred* returned ``false`` for all elements, ``true`` otherwise.
Returns ``false`` if *arr* is empty.

Example:

Test whether any element in an array is 0: ::

    var is_0 = bind1st(eq, 0);
    assertEquals(true, some(is_0, [1, 2, 0, 3]));
    assertEquals(false, some(is_0, [1, 2, 3]));

find(val, arr)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*val* is any value, *arr* is an array.  *find* returns the first index
of *val* in *arr*, -1 if not found.

find_if(pred, arr)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*pred* is an `array callback`_, *arr* is an array.  *pred* is called once
with each element in *arr* until it returns ``true``.  *find_if* returns
the index of the element in *arr* for which *pred* returned ``true``
or -1 if there was no such element.

coalesce(values[, dflt])
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*values* is an array.  *dflt* is an optional default return value.
*coalesce* returns first non-null element of *values*, or, if no such
element is found, *dflt* when given, and ``null`` otherwise.

previous(init)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*init* is any value.  *previous* returns a unary function which returns
*init* on the first call, and its argument from the previous call on all
subsequent ones.


Operators
=========

Arithmetic Operations
+++++++++++++++++++++

dec(init)
~~~~~~~~~

*init* is a number.  *dec* returns a function such that calling it is
the same as ``--init``.

div(lhs, rhs)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*lhs* is any value.  *rhs* is any value.  *div* is a trivial wrapper around
the intrinsic / operator.

See Also: `intdiv`_.

Equivalency: ::

    div(x, y) == (x / y)

inc(init)
~~~~~~~~~

*init* is a number.  *inc* returns a function such that calling it is
the same as ``++init``.

intdiv(lhs, rhs)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*lhs* is a number.  *rhs* is a number.  *intdiv* returns the floored
quotient of *lhs* and *rhs*.

See Also: `div`_.

Equivalency: ::

    intdiv(lhs, rhs) == Math.floor(lhs / rhs)

Possible implementation: ::

    var intdiv = compose(Math.floor, div);

minus(lhs, rhs)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*lhs* is any value.  *rhs* is any value.  *minus* is a trivial wrapper around
the intrinsic - operator.

Equivalency: ::

    minus(x, y) == (x - y)

mod(lhs, rhs)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*lhs* is any value.  *rhs* is any value.  *mod* is a trivial wrapper around
the intrinsic % operator.

Equivalency: ::

    mod(x, y) == (x % y)

mul(lhs, rhs)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*lhs* is any value.  *rhs* is any value.  *mul* is a trivial wrapper around
the intrinsic * operator.

Equivalency: ::

    mul(x, y) == (x * y)

neg(v)
~~~~~~

Equivalency: ::

    neg(v) == (0 - v)

Possible implementation: ::

    var neg = bind1st(minus, 0);

plus(lhs, rhs)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*lhs* is any value.  *rhs* is any value.  *plus* is a trivial wrapper around
the intrinsic + operator.

Equivalency: ::

    plus(x, y) == (x + y)

pow(b, x)
~~~~~~~~~

Equivalency: ::

    pow(x, y) == Math.pow(x, y)

Comparisons
+++++++++++

compare(lhs, rhs)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*lhs* is any value.  *rhs* is any value.  *compare* returns an integer
greater than, equal to, or less than 0, according as *lhs* is greater than,
equal to, or less than *rhs*.

Equivalency: ::

  (compare(lhs, rhs) > 0)  == (lhs > rhs)
  (compare(lhs, rhs) < 0)  == (lhs < rhs)
  (compare(lhs, rhs) == 0) == (lhs == rhs)

See Also: `max`_, `min`_.

eq(lhs, rhs)
~~~~~~~~~~~~

*lhs* is any value, *rhs* is any value.  *eq* returns ``true`` if
``lhs == rhs`` and ``false`` otherwise.

Equivalency: ::

    eq(lhs, rhs) == (lhs == rhs)

Example:

Find the index of the first zero element in an array: ::

    var arr = range(16, 9, -4);
    assertEquals(4, find_if(bind2nd(eq, 0), arr));

even(int)
~~~~~~~~~

*int* is an integer.  *even* returns true if *int* is even, false otherwise.

Equivalency: ::

    even(int) == (0 == (int % 2))

See Also: `odd`_.

Possible implementation: ::

    var even = negate(odd);

Example: ::

    var numbers = [ ... ];
    var evens = filter(even, numbers);

ge(lhs, rhs)
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Equivalency: ::

    ge(lhs, rhs) == (lhs >= rhs)

Example:

Find the index of the first nonnegative element in an array: ::

    var arr = range(-3, 7);
    assertEquals(3, find_if(bind2nd(ge, 0), arr));

gt(lhs, rhs)
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Equivalency: ::

    gt(lhs, rhs) == (lhs > rhs)

Example:

Find the index of the first positive element in an array: ::

    var arr = range(-3, 7);
    assertEquals(4, find_if(bind2nd(gt, 0), arr));

is_a(val, cls)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*val* is any value.  *cls* is a class.  *is_a* returns true if and only
if *val instanceof cls*.

Equivalency: ::

    is_a(v, c) == v instanceof c

See Also: `type_of`_.

is_null(val)
~~~~~~~~~~~~

*val* is any value.  *is_null* returns true if and only if *null == val*.

Equivalency: ::

    is_null(v) == (null == v)

Possible implementation: ::

    var is_null = bind1st(eq, null);

le(lhs, rhs)
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Equivalency: ::

    le(lhs, rhs) == (lhs <= rhs)

Example:

Find the index of the first nonpositive element in an array: ::

    var arr = range(7, 7, -2);
    assertEquals(4, find_if(bind2nd(le, 0), arr));

lt(lhs, rhs)
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Equivalency: ::

    lt(lhs, rhs) == (lhs < rhs)

Example:

Find the index of the first negative element in an array: ::

    var arr = range(3, 7, -1);
    assertEquals(4, find_if(bind2nd(lt, 0), arr));

max(lhs, rhs)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*lhs* is any value.  *rhs* is any value.  *max* returns *rhs* iff *rhs* is
greater than *lhs*, otherwise *lhs*.  Reference types are not copied.

Equivalency: ::

    max(lhs, rhs) == (lhs < rhs) ? rhs : lhs

See Also: `compare`_, `min`_.

Example:

Find the greatest value in an array: ::

    assertEquals(7, reduce(max, [0, 7, -3, 5], Number.NEGATIVE_INFINITY));

min(lhs, rhs)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*lhs* is any value.  *rhs* is any value.  *min* returns *rhs* iff *rhs* is
less than *lhs*, otherwise *lhs*.  Reference types are not copied.

Equivalency: ::

    min(lhs, rhs) == (lhs > rhs) ? rhs : lhs

See Also: `compare`_, `max`_.

Example:

Find the smallest value in an array: ::

    assertEquals(-3, reduce(min, [0, 7, -3, 5], Number.POSITIVE_INFINITY));

odd(int)
~~~~~~~~

*int* is an integer.  *odd* returns true if *int* is odd, false otherwise.

Equivalency: ::

    odd(int) == (0 != (int % 2))

See Also: `even`_.

Possible implementation: ::

    var odd = to_bool(bind2nd(mod, 2));

Example: ::

    var numbers = [ ... ];
    var odds = filter(odd, numbers);

Logical Operations
++++++++++++++++++

false_()
~~~~~~~~

Returns ``false``.

Equivalency: ::

    false_() == false

See Also: `true_`_, `value`_.

Possible implementation: ::

    var false_ = negate(true_);

not(val)
~~~~~~~~

*val* is any value.  *not* returns *val*'s logical complement.

Equivalency: ::

    not(v) == !v

See Also: `negate`_.

true_()
~~~~~~~

Returns ``true``.

Equivalency: ::

    true_() == true

See Also: `false_`_, `value`_.

Possible implementation: ::

    var true_ = value(true);

Identity Operations
+++++++++++++++++++

$1(...)
~~~~~~~

*$1* is a variadic function which returns its first argument.

Equivalency: ::

    $1(x, y, z) == x

See Also: `$2`_, `$3`_, `itself`_.

Possible implementation: ::

    var $1 == project(0);

$2(...)
~~~~~~~

*$2* is a variadic function which returns its second argument.

Equivalency: ::

    $2(x, y, z) == y

See Also: `$1`_, `$3`_.

Possible implementation: ::

    var $2 == project(1);

$3(...)
~~~~~~~

*$3* is a variadic function which returns its third argument.

Equivalency: ::

    $3(x, y, z) == z

See Also: `$1`_, `$2`_.

Possible implementation: ::

    var $3 == project(2);

$N(...)
~~~~~~~

*$N* is a variadic function which returns its last argument.

Equivalency: ::

    $N(x, y, z) == z

itself(val)
~~~~~~~~~~~

*val* is any value.  *itself* returns *val*.  Reference types are not copied.

Equivalency: ::

    itself(v) == v

See Also: `$1`_, `value`_.

project(i)
~~~~~~~~~~

*i* is zero-based argument position.  *project* returns a variadic function
which returns its *i*'th argument.

Equivalency: ::

    project(i)(x, y, z) == [x, y, z][i]

Possible implementation: ::

    var project = bind(compose, [select, value(argv)]);

See Also: `project`_.

select(i)
~~~~~~~~~

*i* is an array index.  *select* returns a function which takes an array and
returns its *i*'th member.

Equivalency: ::

    select(i)(arr) == arr[i]

See Also: `nth`_, `project`_.

Possible implementation: ::

    var select = bind1st(bind2nd, member);

Class and Object Operations
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++

empty(arr)
~~~~~~~~~~

*arr* is an array.  *empty* returns true if and only if *0 == length(arr)*.

Equivalency: ::

    empty(arr) == (0 == length(arr))

See Also: `length`_.

Possible implementation: ::

    var empty = bind(eq, [value(0), length]);

in_(prop, obj)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*prop* is an object property name or array index.  *obj* is an object or
array.  *in_* returns true if and only if *prop in obj* is true.

Equivalency: ::

    in_(foo, bar) == (foo in bar)

See Also: `member`_.

length(arr)
~~~~~~~~~~~

*arr* is an array.  *length* returns *arr.length*.

Equivalency: ::

    length(arr) == arr.length

See Also: `empty`_.

Possible implementation: ::

    var length = bind2nd(member, 'length');

member(obj, prop)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*obj* is an array or an object.  *prop* is an array index or property name.
*member* returns *obj[prop]*.

Equivalency: ::

    member(o, i) == o[i]

See Also: `nth`_.

Example: ::

    var arr = range(0, 5);
    assertEquals(5, member(arr, 'length'));
    assertEquals(3, member(arr, 3));

new_(cls)
~~~~~~~~~

*cls* is a class.  *new_* returns a variadic function such that calling it with
arguments *a1, a2, ... aN* is the same as calling *new cls(a1, a2, ... aN)*.
The highest possible *N* is 10. Calling the function returned from *new_* with
more than 10 arguments will cause an exception.

Equivalency: ::

    new_(cls)(x, y, z) == (new cls(x, y, z))

Example:

Create Date objects: ::

    var dates = map(
        new_(Date)
      , range(1199142000000, 7, 86400000)
    );

type_of(val)
~~~~~~~~~~~~

*val* is any value.  *type_of* is a trivial wrapper around the intrinsic
``typeof`` operator.

See Also: `is_a`_.

.. section-numbering::

.. _$1: `$1(...)`_
.. _$2: `$2(...)`_
.. _$3: `$3(...)`_
.. _apply: `apply(fun, args)`_
.. _argv: `argv(...)`_
.. _bind1st: `bind1st(fun, lhs)`_
.. _bind2nd: `bind2nd(fun, rhs)`_
.. _binder: `binder(fun)`_
.. _bind: `bind(fun, binders)`_
.. _collect: `collect(fun)`_
.. _compare: `compare(lhs, rhs)`_
.. _compose: `compose(f, g)`_
.. _composex: `composex(fs)`_
.. _conjoin: `conjoin(fs)`_
.. _copy: `copy(arr)`_
.. _disjoin: `disjoin(fs)`_
.. _div: `div(lhs, rhs)`_
.. _empty: `empty(arr)`_
.. _even: `even(int)`_
.. _false_: `false`_()_
.. _filter: `filter(pred, arr)`_
.. _group_by: `group_by(fun, arr)`_
.. _insert: `insert(arr)`_
.. _intdiv: `intdiv(lhs, rhs)`_
.. _iota: `iota(cnt)`_
.. _is_a: `is_a(val, cls)`_
.. _items: `items(obj)`_
.. _itself: `itself(val)`_
.. _join: `join(arr[, sep])`_
.. _joiner: `joiner(sep)`_
.. _length: `length(arr)`_
.. _map: `map(fun, arr)`_
.. _max: `max(lhs, rhs)`_
.. _member: `member(obj, prop)`_
.. _min: `min(lhs, rhs)`_
.. _negate: `negate(fun)`_
.. _not: `not(val)`_
.. _nth: `nth(arr)`_
.. _odd: `odd(int)`_
.. _product: `product(arr)`_
.. _project: `project(i)`_
.. _properties: `properties(obj)`_
.. _push: `push(arr)`_
.. _reduce: `reduce(fun, arr, init)`_
.. _select: `select(i)`_
.. _split: `split(str[, sep])`_
.. _splitter: `splitter(sep)`_
.. _spread: `spread(fun)`_
.. _sum: `sum(arr)`_
.. _true_: `true`_()_
.. _type_of: `type_of(val)`_
.. _unique: `unique(eqfun, arr)`_
.. _use1st: `use1st(fun)`_
.. _use2nd: `use2nd(fun)`_
.. _value: `value(val)`_

.. vim: ft=rst sts=2 sw=2 tw=80
